
# 0.5.0-SNAPSHOT (2023-mm-dd)

**WIP**

We are happy to announce the release of Scala Native 0.5.0!

Scala Native is an optimizing ahead-of-time compiler and lightweight managed runtime
designed specifically for Scala.
It is developed at the [Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/) and with the help
from [VirtusLab](https://virtuslab.com) along with contributors from the community.

Check out the documentation at
[https://scala-native.readthedocs.io/](https://scala-native.readthedocs.io/en/latest)

## TL;DR
* **Not backward compatible with previous releases**,
* Removed `java.net.URL` and `java.net.URI.toURL` related stubs we don't plan to implement.
* Various changes to the build system. See "Build Integrator features" below.
* Introduce new nativeMode `release-size` optimizes for reduced output binary size

## Breaking changes
* There is a breaking change in the `utsnameOps` of the posixlib. Prior to version 0.4.x, this Ops provided an API
that returned system properties as `String` for `Ptr[utsname.utsname]`. However, like other posixlib Ops,
it has been changed to return a `CArray` instead of a `String`.

### Broken backward compatibility
Scala Native 0.5.0 breaks backward binary compatibility with previous releases of Scala Native.
Libraries published using version 0.4.x or older must be republished for Scala Native 0.5.x.

### Removal of `java.net` code
Some `java.net.URL` code was added as stubs to help out downstream projects. Java now has a HTTP
client so we don't plan to add the `URL` code to Scala Native.

Third-party libraries may add the removed code listed here into their projects
if they need it for linking.

```scala
package java.net

import scalanative.annotation.stub

class URL(from: String) {
  @stub
  def getPath(): java.lang.String = ???
  @stub
  def getProtocol(): java.lang.String = ???
  @stub
  def openConnection(): java.net.URLConnection = ???
  @stub
  def openStream(): java.io.InputStream = ???
  @stub
  override def hashCode: Int = ???
  @stub
  def toURI(): java.net.URI = ???
  @stub
  def toExternalForm(): java.lang.String = ???
}

package java.net

import scalanative.annotation.stub

class URLClassLoader(args: Array[Object], parent: ClassLoader)
    extends ClassLoader(parent) {
  @stub
  def getURLs(): Array[Object] = ???
  @stub
  def close(): Unit = ???
}

package java.net

import scalanative.annotation.stub

class URLConnection {
  @stub
  def getLastModified(): scala.Long = ???
  @stub
  def connect(): Unit = ???
  @stub
  def getContentType(): String = ???
  @stub
  def getInputStream(): java.io.InputStream = ???
  @stub
  def setRequestProperty(key: String, value: String): Unit = ???
}
```
If we needed to support a third party library for URL we could follow our normal
extension method to add the following implementation in `java.net.URI` based on
Javadoc and JVM output:

```scala
  @scalanative.annotation.stub
  def toURL(): java.net.URL = if (this.isAbsolute()) {
    new URL(this.toString)
  } else {
    throw new IllegalArgumentException("URI is not absolute")
  }
```

### Replace time_t fields with timespec in POSIX sys/stat.scala

In order to support nanosecond resolution for `java.nio.file.attribute.BasicFileAttributes`, we introduce breaking changes to sys/stat struct.

Previously, `stat` struct was defined as following and you were able to access second resolution file stat fields `st_atime`, `st_mtime` and `st_ctime` by `_7`, `_8` and `_9`.

```scala
type stat = CStruct13[
  dev_t, // st_dev
  dev_t, // st_rdev
  ino_t, // st_ino
  uid_t, // st_uid
  gid_t, // st_gid
  off_t, // st_size
  time_t, // st_atime
  time_t, // st_mtime
  time_t, // st_ctime
  blkcnt_t, // st_blocks
  blksize_t, // st_blksize
  nlink_t, // st_nlink
  mode_t // st_mode
]
```

Since 0.5.0, `stat` struct uses `timespec` for file stat fields. Therefore, you need to replace `_7`, `_8` and `_9` with `_7._1`, `_8._1` and `_9._1` to access those fields.

```scala
  type stat = CStruct13[
    dev_t, // st_dev
    dev_t, // st_rdev
    ino_t, // st_ino
    uid_t, // st_uid
    gid_t, // st_gid
    off_t, // st_size
    timespec, // st_atim or st_atimespec
    timespec, // st_mtim or st_mtimespec
    timespec, // st_ctim or st_ctimespec
    blkcnt_t, // st_blocks
    blksize_t, // st_blksize
    nlink_t, // st_nlink
    mode_t // st_mode
  ]
```

There is a helper implicit class `statOps`, which provides human-friendly field accessors like `st_dev` or `st_rdev`. It is recommended to use these fields from `statOps` rather than accessing fields by `_N`.

For example, import `scala.scalanative.posix.timeOps._` and `scala.scalanative.posix.sys.statOps.statOps`, then you can get the last access time of a file by `st_atime` or `st_atim` field.

```scala
import scala.scalanative.unsafe._
import scala.scalanative.posix.sys.stat
import scala.scalanative.posix.timeOps._
import scala.scalanative.posix.sys.statOps.statOps

Zone { implicit z =>
  val filepath = c"/path/to/file"
  val stat = alloc[stat.stat]()
  stat.stat(filepath, stat)
  // directly get the last access time in second resolution
  val atime = stat.st_atime
  // get the last access time in second resolution from timespec
  val atimesec = stat.st_atim.tv_sec 
  // get access time in nanosecond resolution from timespec
  val atimensec = stat.st_atim.tv_nsec
}


```

### Corrections to  POSIX sys/utsname.scala

A number of defects have been corrected in `sys/utsname.scala`. These
corrections required breaking changes to field definition.  The change
most noticeable to end users is likely to be that the `uname` object,
holding implicit conversions, has been renamed to `utsname`.

A Test in `UtsnameTest.scala` shows on way of using the required CArray
fields in the `utsname` structure as instances of Scala types.


## Deprecated definitions 

### Removed in this version


Ordered by version of Scala Native in which a deprecation was introduced.

* Deprecated in 0.3.7

  * ScalaNativePlugin.scala 'val AutoImport'.<BR>

* Deprecated in 0.4.0

  * scala.scalanative.unsafe.alloc with signed type.<BR>
    Suggested replacement: unsafe.alloc with unsigned type.

  * scala.scalanative.unsafe.stackalloc with signed type.<BR>
    Suggested replacement: unsafe.stackalloc with unsigned type.

* Deprecated in 0.4.1

  * scala.scalanative.libc.signal.kill(pid, sig).<BR>
    Suggested replacement: kill(pid, sig) from POSIX signal.

  * scala.scalanative.libc.signal.SIGUSR1.<BR>
    Suggested replacement: SIGUSR1 from POSIX signal.

  * scala.scalanative.runtime.GC.alloc(rawty: RawPtr, size: CSize)<BR>
	Suggested replacement: none, Scala Native internal use only.

  * scala.scalanative.runtime.GC.alloc_atomic(rawty: RawPtr, size: CSize)<BR>
	Suggested replacement: none, Scala Native internal use only.

  * scala.scalanative.runtime.Platform.windowsGetUserCountry()<BR>
	Suggested replacement: Use windows.WinNlsApi to retrieve country

  * scala.scalanative.runtime.Platform.windowsGetUserLang()<BR>
	Suggested replacement: Use windows.WinNlsApi to retrieve locale

  * scala.scalanative.runtime.package.toClass(rtti: RawPtr)<BR>
	Suggested replacement: none, Scala Native internal use only.

  * scala.scalanative.runtime.package.toRawType(cls: Class[_])<BR>
	Suggested replacement: none, Scala Native internal use only.

  * scala.scalanative.runtime.package.getRawType(obj: Object)<BR>
	Suggested replacement: none, Scala Native internal use only.

### Introduced in this version
All newly deprecated declarations are subject to removal in the future.

* posixlib unistd.scala 'sethostname()' is now deprecated because it
  is not part of the POSIX 2018 standard.

* posixlib unistd.scala 'vfork()' is now deprecated because it was removed
  in the POSIX.1-2018 standard. Suggested replacement: 'posix_spawn()'.

### Build integrator features

There are a few features to be used by build tool integrators that have
changed.

- `config.artifactPath` The final artifact is now calculated for the integrator. No need to worry about the extension for Windows.
- Now the `baseName` can be set by the developer if the module name is not desired.
- `config.withTestConfig(true)` for tests to allow a `-test` to be appended as before for test applications. The default is `false` for normal projects.
- `config.withBaseDir(crossTarget)` is a Path that needs to be set rather than `workDir`.
- `config.workDir` is now calculated from `baseDir` but is available for integrators as needed.

```scala
val nativeConfig = build.NativeConfig.empty
  withBaseName("myapp") // override config module name

val config = build.Config.empty
  .withLogger(logger)
  .withMainClass(mainClass)
  .withClassPath(classpath)
  .withBaseDir(crossTarget) // Path
  .withModuleName(module.name)
  .withTestConfig(testConfig)
  .withCompilerConfig(nativeConfig)
```

### Other breaking changes:
* Runtime environment variables to control the Garbage Collector are now aligned
to match the Boehm GC as much as possible. In particular the first two variables
are used on all GCs. The last one works on Boehm and Commix.
    * GC_INITIAL_HEAP_SIZE (was SCALANATIVE_MIN_HEAP_SIZE)
    * GC_MAXIMUM_HEAP_SIZE (was SCALANATIVE_MAX_HEAP_SIZE)
    * GC_NPROCS (was SCALANATIVE_GC_THREADS)

## New features

### User build settings

You can now specify the `basename` of your executable. Typically it will
default to the project's module name.

```scala
lazy val myproj = project
  .in(file("."))
  .settings(
    nativeConfig ~= { c =>
      c.withBaseName("myapp")
    }
  )
```

### Supported Scala versions
We added ...

## Bugfixes

* Document the long standing fact that ``unsafe.stackalloc[T]``
  zeros the allocated memory.

## Contributors

Big thanks to everybody who contributed to this release or reported an issue!

```
$ git shortlog -sn --no-merges v0.4.x..v0.5.0

```

<table>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>Merged PRs</td>
    <td align="center"></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Closed issues</td>
    <td align="center"></td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>Contributors</td>
    <td align="center"></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
</tbody>
</table>

[Full Changelog](https://github.com/scala-native/scala-native/compare/v0.4.x...v0.5.0)

### The most impacting merged pull requests:
#### Compiler

#### Sbt plugin

#### Native library

#### Java standard library
