# The compiler plugin and code generator

Compilation to native code happens in two steps. First, Scala code is
compiled into [nir](./nir.md) by nscplugin, the
Scala compiler plugin. It runs as one of the later phases of the Scala
compiler and inspects the AST and generates `.nir` files. Finally, the
`.nir` files are compiled into `.ll` files and passed to LLVM by the
native compiler.

<figure>
<img src="compilation.png" alt="compilation.png" />
<figcaption>High-level overview of the compilation process.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Tips for working on the compiler

When adding a new intrinsic, the first thing to check is how clang would
compile it in C. Write a small program with the behavior you are trying
to add and compile it to `.ll` using:

    clang -S -emit-llvm foo.c

Now write the equivalent Scala code for the new intrinsic in the sandbox
project. This project contains a minimal amount of code and has all the
toolchain set up which makes it fast to iterate and inspect the output
of the compilation.

The following directions are using the Scala 3 project. To use other
Scala versions first find the project name and then use that instead of
\"sandbox3\", say \"sandbox2_13\":

    sbt> sandbox<TAB>

To compile the sandbox project run the following in the sbt shell:

    sbt> sandbox3/clean; sandbox3/nativeLink

Compiling will generate a number of files. The `.ll` LLVM assembly
language files can be inspected to see what was passed to the LLVM step.

You can inspect the `.ll` files in the directories below
`sandbox/.3/target/`. Because Scala Native is under active development,
the directory layout, names of files and their specific content may
change.

All definitions are generated into 1 or N=(number of CPUs) `*.ll` files.
A Linux example on system with 4 CPUs:

    $ # on command line, with project root as current working directory.
    $ find sandbox/.3/target -name "*.ll"
    sandbox/.3/target/scala-3.1.3/native/3.ll
    sandbox/.3/target/scala-3.1.3/native/2.ll
    sandbox/.3/target/scala-3.1.3/native/1.ll
    sandbox/.3/target/scala-3.1.3/native/0.ll

Any method, including the `main` method, might be defined in any of
these files. [Appendix A](./appendices.md#appendix-a-finding-main-methods-in-ll-files) will help
locating the code you are interested in.

Once you have located the code, you must be familiar with the [LLVM
assembly language](http://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html). NIR is a subset
of the LLVM assembly language, so [nir](./nir.md)
may be a gentler starting point.

When working on the compiler plugin you\'ll need to clean the sandbox
(or other Scala Native projects) if you want it to be recompiled with
the newer version of the compiler plugin. This can be achieved with:

    sbt> sandbox3/clean; sandbox3/run

Certain intrinsics might require adding new primitives to the compiler
plugin. This can be done in `NirPrimitives` with an accompanying
definition in `NirDefinitions`. Ensure that new primitives are correctly
registered.

The NIR code generation uses a builder to maintain the generated
instructions. This allows to inspect the instructions before and after
the part of the compilation you are working on has generated code.
